docs: update the holistic/delta explanation with the reconciler pattern (#2029)
canonical/operator: docs/explanation/holistic-vs-delta-charms.md

(holistic-vs-delta-charms)=
# Holistic vs delta charms

Stateless charms are more robust. The charming community developed two approaches to keep charms mostly stateless: "holistic" and "delta".

- Holistic charms reconcile towards a goal state on every event.
- Delta charms handle each Juju event individually.

Note that processing of some Juju events doesn't lend to this distinction.

## Handling events holistically

A typical holistic charm subscribes the same observer method, often called `_reconcile` to all interesting Juju events.
The event payload is ignored, and reconciliation progresses towards a defined goal state: typically a functional workload configured appropriately and able to interact with the related applications.

> This implies that the observer has to scrape the entirety of the Juju state available to the current unit, as well as workload state.

Author: I actually wanted to make a point that the reconcile loop should fetch everything the given unit is allowed to see:

- if a charm declares a relation, the reconcile loop should all relations on that endpoint...
   - arguably, only remote app or remote unit data, probably not both, probably not own unit data
   - arguably only the fields that charm understands
- if there's a peer relation, it should read that
   - arguably either app (leader) databag or all peer unit databags
- if there are configuration options, each config field value

If something is not read in the reconcile loop, when would it be read?

That being said, this part is kinda intro, so maybe I can be concise here.

Let me think about this.

In addition, the charm may receive an event like `config-changed` before it's ready to handle it, for example, if the container is not yet ready. In such cases, a delta charm may defer the event (effectively storing a small amount of state) or could try to wait for both events to occur using intricate, error-prone custom logic.

The holistic approach side-steps this disparity and applies a single code path, `_reconcile` to all events of interest, which scrapes all of the visible state to perform computation, and updates all writable state.

### Example

```py
def __init__(self, framework: ops.Framework):
    super().__init__(framework)
    self.typed_config = self.load_config(ConfigClass, errors='blocked')
    self.workload = Workload()
    self.foo = FooRequirer()
    self.bar = BarProvider()

    events = [self.on.start, self.on.config_changed, self.on.foo_relation_changed, ...]

    for event in events:
        framework.observe(event, self._reconcile)

def _reconcile(self, event: Any):
    # Early checks

>     workload_ready = self.workload.is_ready

Reviewer: Yeah, my feelings aren't quite as strong as they once were, but I do still feel that it's better to avoid introducing race conditions, even if they're extremely unlikely.

Here, I guess it depends what the expectation for `.is_ready`. If it's `.can_connect()` then I think it is better to avoid that and just try to update the container, retry a small number of times, and then move into error otherwise. If it's assuming the container is ready and checking the *workload* is ready in some way, then I'd still expect that EAFP is better, since as Ben says the workload itself might become unready too.

I think the following two lines, which check that a relation is "ready" are a bit different. I assume that's meant to be "has required data" as well as "is integrated" and those can't change during the hook, so LBYL is pretty safe there.

>     workload_ready = self.workload.is_ready

Author: I've reworked this, ptal.

    foo_ready = self.foo.is_ready
    bar_ready = self.bar.is_ready
    
    if workload_ready and foo_ready and bar_ready:
        # Read the inputs: configuration, libraries and the workload
        path = self.typed_config.some_path

>         foo_port = self.foo.service_port

Author: `self.typed_config` is documented here https://documentation.ubuntu.com/ops/latest/howto/manage-configuration/#observe-the-config-changed-event-and-define-the-event-handler

Now that Tony's typed config has landed, I figured it's better to use this idiom.

`self.typed_config`, `self.foo` and `self.bar` are initialised in charm's `__init__` in the same code snippet, 18 lines above.

Am I perhaps missing the concern?

>         foo_port = self.foo.service_port

Reviewer: I'm +1 (admittedly not unbiased here :laughing:) on using `load_config` and an `__init__` time load into `typed_config` is a pattern we like, I think, rather than loading in multiple methods (particularly if `errors="blocked"` is used, like here).

The `.foo` and `.bar` are definitely an established pattern, and if they have observers (which they don't here since `self` wasn't passed in, but often would) they need to be attributes of the charm to avoid the handler being garbage collected so you're almost forced into this anyway. Maybe the issue is just that it's not clear for the generic names that these are interface library classes?

>         foo_port = self.foo.service_port

Reviewer 2: Okay, I'm sold on `self.typed_config` then. But yeah, it's not clear from the generic names `foo` and `bar` what they are intended to represent.

>         foo_port = self.foo.service_port

Author: I've updates this to:

```
    self.foo = FooRequirer()

        self.on['foo'].relation_changed,

    foo_ready = self.foo.is_ready

        foo_value = self.foo.some_relation_property

        self.foo.update_some_relation_field(bar_value)
```

I waas trying to abstract away from any specific provider and requirer, but this is about a charm library that wraps a relation.

>         foo_port = self.foo.service_port

Author: Renamed to `foo_requirer` and `bar_provider`.

        bar_name = self.bar.remote_name
        current_config = self.workload.config
        workload_path = self.workload.special_path

        # Compute the new state
        workload_config = self.render_config(path, foo_port, bar_name)

        # Write the outputs to the libraries and the workload
        if workload_config != current_config:
            self.workload.update_config_and_restart(workload_config)

>         self.bar.update_foo_port(foo_port)

Author: maybe `foo_value = self.foo.some_relation_property`

        self.foo.update_bar_name(bar_name)

    else:

>         # Error handling

Reviewer: I think we can recommend using collect-status, without saying that charms *have* to use it. If you don't have custom priority needs then I think our position is that you should use collect-status.

Repeating some of the checks is not ideal, but that's how the feature works. If you really don't want that, then I think we're ok with the approach where the reconcile function collects status objects and then collect-status does something like:

```python
for s in self._statuses:
    event.add_status(s)
````

I think early-exit guards that just return (or add a status and return) is a cleaner reconcile than wrapping the whole thing and exiting at the end.

Charm libraries too can be written using the reconciler pattern, see [the implementation of `ops.tracing.Tracing`](https://github.com/canonical/operator/blob/af6764fbfdcf8ed42a0edb331870dd9d37dc804b/tracing/ops_tracing/_api.py#L128-L163) for an example.

Some applications, like database or observability providers, are expected to be related to an unbounded number of other applications.
It may become expensive to scrape all the data from that relation on every hook.

Such applications should be profiled, and, based on the results, the charm developer may cache the Juju state, communicate less on the relation and [more out of band](https://github.com/charmed-hpc/slurm-charms/blob/edc47369560845fa54f81a2f02e0a3870b14302a/charms/slurmrestd/src/charm.py#L93-L98), or perhaps reconsider whether this key relation processing could be moved out of the reconciliation loop.
Similar [performance concern](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/performance-limitations-of-peer-relations-and-a-solution/18144) applies to peer relation processing for applications where hundreds of units may be expected.

## Which approach to use?

> At a high level, simple workloads are perfectly served by delta charms.

Author: I personally see two cases where delta processing works:

- very simple charms, like ubuntu man pages
- key relation processing in database charms

I'm not sure if we should recommend the latter though, because it can get messy very quickly (e.g. pebble not ready on k8s).

> At a high level, simple workloads are perfectly served by delta charms.

Reviewer 2: Okay, fair enough. This seems like a reasonable place to start.

> At a high level, simple workloads are perfectly served by delta charms.

Author: Discussion notes:
- vm charms are more delta-friendly, because the workload state is durable
- maintaining existing delta charm: continue with delta probably
- creating a wkld resource when relation is joined, removing when it's departed?
- maybe when enumerating all relations or all workload things is hopeless slow
   - maybe an S3 adaptor: only uses one relation and on cloud thing... a proxy for something external???
   - maybe a integration test double (local minio instead of real s3: one relation only, predefined config, no secrets) ✨

Probably not:
- adaptor charms (workload-less, e.g. haproxy to ingress, relation limit), still a mini-reconciler
- action-only charms?
- toy charms, maybe??
- not simple charms though, because if it's a charm, it ought to have at least two inputs (e.g. config and relation)

### Why reconcile?

Conceptually, a Juju event informs the unit that a specific thing has changed at a predefined level in the Juju event model, while the charm author wants the charm to process a unit's logical state at the workload's own granularity.

```{list-table}
:header-rows: 1

* - Juju event
  - Unit logical state
* - `config-changed`
  - Configuration is valid and complete
* - `pebble-ready`
  - Workload container is reachable
* - `relation-joined`
  - The set of consumers requires provisioning
* - `relation-changed`
  - Consumer requirements are defined
```

Juju provides specific event kinds that signal that one "thing" changed: `config-changed` says that a configuration value has changed, `relation-changed` says that relation data has changed.

However, this only goes so far: `config-changed` doesn't tell the charm which configuration keys have changed or whether configuration has become valid; `relation-changed` doesn't tell the charm how the relation data has changed or whether the data can be parsed.

> In addition, the charm may receive an event like `config-changed` before it's ready to handle it, for example, if the container is not yet ready. In such cases, a delta charm may defer the event (effectively storing a small amount of state) or could try to wait for both events to occur using intricate, error-prone custom logic.

Author: David's suggesting is good considering the next paragraph

    foo_ready = self.foo.is_ready
    bar_ready = self.bar.is_ready
    
    if workload_ready and foo_ready and bar_ready:
        # Read the inputs: configuration, libraries and the workload
        path = self.typed_config.some_path
        foo_port = self.foo.service_port
        bar_name = self.bar.remote_name
        current_config = self.workload.config
        workload_path = self.workload.special_path

        # Compute the new state
        workload_config = self.render_config(path, foo_port, bar_name)

        # Write the outputs to the libraries and the workload
        if workload_config != current_config:
            self.workload.update_config_and_restart(workload_config)
        self.bar.update_foo_port(foo_port)
        self.foo.update_bar_name(bar_name)

    else:
        # Error handling
        ...
```

The reconciler method above has been reduced for clarity, but is representative of the common reconciler pattern.
It consists of three main parts in addition to early checks and error handling:

- reading the inputs (configuration, workload and Juju state)
- computing the new state
- writing the output (updating the workload and writing out the Juju state)

> Well-written charms include helper methods or classes for the workload and use charm libraries to read and write Juju state on charm's relations.

Author: No, what I'm trying to refer to is "the subset of Juju model state that's visible to the given unit" which is roughly the same as "all the Juju state that unit can scrape using the hook tools".

I think I've rewritten this bit twice already, and it's still unclear.
What would you call it?

You may notice that the role of a complex charm is to cross-connect configuration, workload and libraries.
In fact, complex charms often use many charm libraries, moving the emphasis towards shovelling data from a set of charm libraries to other charm libraries.

### Expert reconcilers

Reconciliation happens towards a certain goal state.
For many charms, and for most of the charm's lifecycle, the goal state is the same: a running workload with correct configuration.
Rarely, the goal state may change:

- unit lifecycle end, that is, graceful shutdown
- failover to another unit, leaving this unit on stand-by

Complex charms often split the reconciler method in functional constituents, see [Parca Kubernetes Operator](https://github.com/canonical/parca-k8s-operator/blob/6fda0c9844bc7a45b93ac12806a6ef04036c50c4/src/charm.py#L188-L206) for an example.

> Charm libraries too can be written using the reconciler pattern, see [the implementation of `ops.tracing.Tracing`](https://github.com/canonical/operator/blob/af6764fbfdcf8ed42a0edb331870dd9d37dc804b/tracing/ops_tracing/_api.py#L128-L163) for an example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Charm libraries too can be written using the reconciler pattern. See [the implementation of `ops.tracing.Tracing`](https://github.com/canonical/operator/blob/af6764fbfdcf8ed42a0edb331870dd9d37dc804b/tracing/ops_tracing/_api.py#L128-L163) for an example.
```

Some applications, like database or observability providers, are expected to be related to an unbounded number of other applications.
It may become expensive to scrape all the data from that relation on every hook.

> Such applications should be profiled, and, based on the results, the charm developer may cache the Juju state, communicate less on the relation and [more out of band](https://github.com/charmed-hpc/slurm-charms/blob/edc47369560845fa54f81a2f02e0a3870b14302a/charms/slurmrestd/src/charm.py#L93-L98), or perhaps reconsider whether this key relation processing could be moved out of the reconciliation loop.

Reviewer 3: I'd split the long sentence and make it more active. Something like:

```suggestion
If you're developing such an application, you should profile the application. Based on the results, you might cache the Juju state, communicate less on the relation and [more out of band](https://github.com/charmed-hpc/slurm-charms/blob/edc47369560845fa54f81a2f02e0a3870b14302a/charms/slurmrestd/src/charm.py#L93-L98), or reconsider whether this key relation processing could be moved out of the reconciliation loop.
```

Similar [performance concern](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/performance-limitations-of-peer-relations-and-a-solution/18144) applies to peer relation processing for applications where hundreds of units may be expected.

## Handling events individually

> A *delta-based* charm is when the charm handles each kind of Juju hook with a separate handler function, which does the minimum necessary to process that kind of event.

Reviewer 3: I think we can drop the italics, as we seem to have dropped them elsewhere in the doc

```suggestion
A delta-based charm is when the charm handles each kind of Juju hook with a separate handler function, which does the minimum necessary to process that kind of event.
```

Juju itself nudges charm authors in this direction.
Juju provides specific event kinds that signal that one "thing" changed: `config-changed` says that a configuration value has changed, `relation-changed` says that relation data has changed, `pebble-ready` signals that the Pebble in the workload container has become ready, and so on.

> A delta charm may look like this:

Reviewer 3: I think we can go straight into the example

```suggestion
```

### Example

```py
def __init__(self, framework: ops.Framework):
    super().__init__(framework)
    self.framework.observe(self.on.install, self._on_install)
    self.framework.observe(self.on.start, self._on_start)

    hostname = socket.getfqdn()
    self.foo = FooRequires(self, "foo-relation", address=hostname)
    self.framework.observe(self.foo.on.data_available, self._on_data_available)

    self.bar = BarProvider(self, "bar-relation")
    self.framework.observe(self.bar.on.create_bar, self._on_create_bar)

def _on_install(self, event: ops.InstallEvent):
    # Install the workload binary
    apt.add_package("some-workload")

def _on_start(self, event: ops.StartEvent):
    # This unit has been started, peer relations are usable
    if self.unit.is_leader():
        ...

def _on_data_available(self, event: DataAvailableEvent):
    # Update the workload with event's data
    self.workload.reconfigure(some_key=event.some_value)

def _on_create_bar(self, event: CreateBarEvent):
    # Provision a `Bar` resourse in the workload

>     self.workload.create_foo(event.some_field)

Reviewer: Probably no "self" here, since there's no `self.workload = ` in `__init__`, and we're generally suggesting that the workload module has these sorts of things, without needing a class/object.

Author: I'll add `self.workload = ...` for parity with the holistic example.

```

Notice how the handler methods map to Juju and custom events directly.
There's less boilerplate and flow control is predictable.

### Developing your charm

> Unit testing is initially straightforward, however both charm and tests get messy when event interdependencies are accounted for:

Reviewer 3: I found this slightly difficult to parse. How about this? I don't think it adds much to mention unit testing first.

```suggestion
The charm code and tests can get messy when event interdependencies are accounted for:
```

- creating a resource is only possible after the workload has been installed
- the available data typically needs to be mixed with application's configuration

> - cases where something is inferred from sequence of events [Juju being helpful](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/charm-lifecycle/5938)

Reviewer 3: I don't think we should like to the old Discourse docs, if possible. How about:

```suggestion
- cases where something is inferred from the sequence of events (see {external+juju:ref}`Juju | Hook ordering <hook>`)
```

A good rule of thumb is this: if you're starting to use `defer` in various places, consider whether it's time to rewrite the charm using the reconciler pattern.

## Which approach to use?

At a high level, simple workloads are served well by delta charms.

> Complex workloads and especially mature feature-rich charms utilising many charm libraries are more robust if the reconciler pattern is followed.

Reviewer 3: I found this sentence a bit tough. How about:

```suggestion
Complex workloads are more robust if the reconciler pattern is followed. The reconciler pattern is especially suitable for mature, feature-rich charms that use several charm libraries.
```

### Dedicated handlers for specific Juju events

Some events are special, and are typically processed outside the reconciler pattern in holistic charms.
In both styles of charms a dedicated event handler is used for:

- unit lifecycle end events, because the goal of reconciliation is different

> - action event, as it is synchronous and the event object holds arguments and result sink

Reviewer: "result sink" feels odd to me.

Author: "holds arguments and results"

- secret rotation event, where secret must be modified synchronously
- secret remove event, because the revision that needs removal is not available otherwise

> - Ops lifecycle events, like `update-unit-status`, which accompany the Juju event

Reviewer: Probably meant to be `collect-unit-status`?

Author: like `on_collect_unit_status`

> - some custom events, if specific charm library API is not suited for reconciliation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- some custom events, if a specific charm library API is not suited for reconciliation
```

A good rule of thumb is this: if an event [cannot be deferred](#how-and-when-to-defer-events), it needs a dedicated handler.

### Events observed by the reconcile method

A holistic charm attaches the same observer to a group of events.
In a charm following the reconciler pattern, the `_reconcile` method is attached to every interesting Juju event:

- unit lifecycle start events
- config change event
- most or all relation events

> - pebble events

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
- Pebble events
```

Consider relations: if a charm declares a relation, it's natural to expect that this unit's behaviour or the remote app behaviour depends on the databag content of the relation.
Therefore, the reconcile method has to read the relation data to apply the latest data, or overwrite own databag with the latest computed data.
Thus, any event on this relation is subject to running the reconciler loop.
Following the same logic, all configuration fields, storage objects, and containers are subject to reconciliation.

### When to use the holistic approach

Several charming teams at Canonical have found that using the reconciler pattern makes a charm more robust.
This comes down to two observations:

- The charm author is thinking about their workload more than about minute Juju semantics.
- When the Juju event is taken out of the equation, the same number of unit tests covers a larger portion of state and event space.

### When to use the delta approach

At the same time, simple operators can be trivially written as delta charms.
Either of the following hints at suitability of such approach:

- The Juju event model can be mapped directly to the workload semantics.

> - The charm is trivial.

Author: I've expanded this section.

(holistic-vs-delta-charms)=
# Holistic vs delta charms

> The charming community developed two approaches to writing robust, stateless charms: "holistic" and "delta".

Reviewer 2: Reads slightly weird now, as if it's all in the past. Perhaps:
```suggestion
The charming community has developed two approaches to writing robust, stateless charms: "holistic" and "delta".
```

This implies that a holistic charm has to fetch all the state it needs: the state of the current unit, and any workload state.
The observer then "rewrites the world": updates all the Juju state it needs to, overwrites the workload configuration, and instructs the workload to reload its configuration.

### Why reconcile?

Conceptually, a Juju event informs the unit that a specific thing has changed in the Juju event model, while the charm author wants the charm to process a unit's logical state at the workload's own granularity. For example:

```{list-table}
:header-rows: 1

* - Juju event
  - Unit logical state
* - `config-changed`
  - Configuration is valid and complete
* - `pebble-ready`
  - Workload container is reachable
* - `relation-joined`
  - The set of consumers requires provisioning
* - `relation-changed`
  - Consumer requirements are defined
```

Juju provides specific event kinds that signal that one "thing" changed: `config-changed` says that a configuration value has changed, `relation-changed` says that relation data has changed.

However, this only goes so far.

> The `config-changed` event doesn't tell the charm which configuration keys have changed or whether configuration has become valid.

Author: I'll try "... logically consistent", because that's kind of the point: advanced charms process inputs at different, application level than raw Juju state.

The `relation-changed` event doesn't tell the charm how the relation data has changed or whether the data can be parsed.

In addition, the charm may receive an event like `config-changed` before it's ready to handle it, for example, if the container is not yet ready.
In such cases, a delta charm may defer the event, effectively storing a small amount of state.

The holistic approach side-steps this disparity and applies a single code path, `_reconcile`, to all events of interest.
The code path reads all state it needs to perform computation, and updates all writable state.

### Example

> The reconciler method above has been reduced for clarity, but is representative of the common reconciler pattern.

Reviewer 2: What does "reconciler method above" refer to here? Should it be "below"?

> The body of the reconciler loop comprises three main parts:

Reviewer 2: "loop" might be confusing, and we've called it a "method" above, so:
```suggestion
The body of the reconciler method comprises three main parts:
```

        self.on['foo-relation'].relation_changed,
        self.on['bar-relation'].relation_changed,
        ...
    ]

    for event in events:
        framework.observe(event, self._reconcile)

def _reconcile(self, _: ops.EventBase):
    # Early checks
    workload_ready = self.workload.is_ready
    foo_ready = self.foo_requirer.is_ready
    bar_ready = self.bar_provider.is_ready
    
    if not workload_ready or not foo_ready or not bar_ready:
        # Status will be set in `_on_collect_unit_status`
        return

    try:
        # 1. Read the inputs: configuration, libraries and the workload
        # 2. Compute the new state
        # 3. Write the outputs to the libraries and the workload
        ...
    except (WorkloadError, FooError, BarError, ops.ModelError, ...):
        # Error handling
        ...
```

### Expert reconcilers

Reconciliation happens towards a certain goal state.
For many charms, and for most of the charm's lifecycle, the goal state is the same: a running workload with correct configuration.
Rarely, the goal state may change:

- unit lifecycle end, that is, graceful shutdown
- failover to another unit, leaving this unit on stand-by

> Complex charms often split the reconciler method into functional constituents. See [Parca Kubernetes Operator](https://github.com/canonical/parca-k8s-operator/blob/6fda0c9844bc7a45b93ac12806a6ef04036c50c4/src/charm.py#L188-L206) for an example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Complex charms often split the reconciler method into functional constituents. See the [Parca Kubernetes Operator](https://github.com/canonical/parca-k8s-operator/blob/6fda0c9844bc7a45b93ac12806a6ef04036c50c4/src/charm.py#L188-L206) for an example.
```

Charm libraries too can be written using the reconciler pattern. See [the implementation of `ops.tracing.Tracing`](https://github.com/canonical/operator/blob/af6764fbfdcf8ed42a0edb331870dd9d37dc804b/tracing/ops_tracing/_api.py#L128-L163) for an example.

Some applications, like database or observability providers, are expected to be related to an unbounded number of other applications.
It may become expensive to scrape all the data from that relation on every hook.

If you're developing such an application, you should profile the application. Based on the results, you might cache the Juju state, communicate less on the relation and [more out of band](https://github.com/charmed-hpc/slurm-charms/blob/edc47369560845fa54f81a2f02e0a3870b14302a/charms/slurmrestd/src/charm.py#L93-L98), or reconsider whether this key relation processing could be moved out of the reconciliation loop.

> Similar [performance concern](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/performance-limitations-of-peer-relations-and-a-solution/18144) applies to peer relation processing for applications where hundreds of units may be expected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similar [performance concerns](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/performance-limitations-of-peer-relations-and-a-solution/18144) apply to peer relation processing for applications where hundreds of units may be expected.
```

    self.framework.observe(self.on.start, self._on_start)

    hostname = socket.getfqdn()
    self.foo_requirer = FooRequirer(self, "foo-relation", address=hostname)
    self.framework.observe(
        self.foo_requirer.on.data_available,
        self._on_data_available,
    )

    self.bar_provider = BarProvider(self, "bar-relation")
    self.framework.observe(
        self.bar_provider.on.create_bar,
        self._on_create_bar,
    )

def _on_install(self, event: ops.InstallEvent):
    self.workload.install_binaries()

def _on_start(self, event: ops.StartEvent):
    self.workload.start_service()
    # Peer relation is now usable
    if self.unit.is_leader():
        ...

def _on_data_available(self, event: DataAvailableEvent):
    # Update the workload with event's data
    self.workload.reconfigure(some_key=event.some_value)

def _on_create_bar(self, event: CreateBarEvent):
    # Provision a `Bar` resource in the workload
    self.workload.create_bar(event.some_field)
```

Notice how the handler methods map to Juju and custom events directly.
There's less boilerplate and flow control is predictable.

### Developing your charm

> The charm code and tests can get messy when event interdependencies are accounted for:

Reviewer 2: This seems to need a transition word, like:
```suggestion
However, the charm code and tests can get messy when event interdependencies are accounted for:
```

- creating a resource is only possible after the workload has been installed
- the available data typically needs to be mixed with application's configuration
- cases where something is inferred from the sequence of events (see {external+juju:ref}`Juju | Hook ordering <hook>`)

A good rule of thumb is this: if you're starting to use `defer` in various places, consider whether it's time to rewrite the charm using the reconciler pattern.

## Which approach to use?

At a high level, simple workloads are served well by delta charms.
Complex workloads are more robust if the reconciler pattern is followed.
The reconciler pattern is especially suitable for mature, feature-rich charms that use several charm libraries.

### Dedicated handlers for specific Juju events

Some events are special, and are typically processed outside the reconciler pattern in holistic charms.
In both styles of charms a dedicated event handler is used for:

> - unit lifecycle end events, because the goal of reconciliation is different

Reviewer 2: What does "unit lifecycle and events" refer to -- can you rephrase or clarify?

> - action event, as it is synchronous and the event object holds arguments and results

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- action events, as these are synchronous, and the event object holds arguments and results
```

> - secret rotation event, where secret must be modified synchronously

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the `secret-rotate` event, where a secret must be modified synchronously
```

> - secret remove event, because the revision that needs removal is not available otherwise

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the `secret-remove` event, because the revision that needs removal is not available otherwise
```

Author: Sorry, I've confused secret-expired and secret-changed yet again.

- Ops lifecycle events, like `on_collect_unit_status`, which accompany the Juju event
- some custom events, if a specific charm library API is not suited for reconciliation

A good rule of thumb is this: if an event [cannot be deferred](#how-and-when-to-defer-events), it needs a dedicated handler.

### Events observed by the reconcile method

A holistic charm attaches the same observer to a group of events.
In a charm following the reconciler pattern, the `_reconcile` method is attached to every interesting Juju event:

> - unit lifecycle start events

Reviewer 2: The word "start" here helps, but similar to above, can you be more specific here?

> - config change event

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the `config-changed` event
```

- most or all relation events
- Pebble events

> - storage events

Reviewer: I think `upgrade-charm` should be here, although perhaps with a mention that's it's quite complicated to handle for stateful charms.

`secret-changed` should be here.

I wonder if it's worth mentioning `update-status`. It doesn't really fit "interesting Juju event", but it is usually included. I think there's some justification that it's to capture updates to the workload status that have occurred outside of Juju events (although for K8s, Pebble events ought to be doing that). Realistically, it's the "just in case something was missed, hopefully this will trigger on a fairly short interval" case.

Author: I think I'll add these without explanation...

Explanations would be great, but probably not in this doc.
